Add Heroku Postgres DB monitoring guide (#13483)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/database_monitoring/guide/heroku-postgres.md

---
title: Setting up Heroku Postgres for Database Monitoring
kind: guide
private: true
further_reading:
- link: "/agent/basic_agent_usage/heroku/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Datadog Heroku Buildpack"
---

This guide assumes that you have configured the [Datadog Heroku buildpack][1] in your application dynos.

> [Datadog Database Monitoring][2] allows you to view query metrics and explain plans from all of your databases in a single place. This guide will cover how to set it up for [Heroku Postgres managed database][3].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Datadog Database Monitoring][2] allows you to view query metrics and explain plans from all of your databases in a single place. This guide covers how to set up Database Monitoring for a [Heroku Postgres managed database][3].
```

*Note*: Only databases in the [Standard and Premium plans][4] publish metrics used by the integration. Not all the features of Database Monitoring are available when used with a Postgres instance in the Hobby plan.

First, create a `datadog` user in your database:

```shell
# Ensure that you are in the root directory of the application
heroku pg:credentials:create --name datadog

# Attach the new credential to the application
heroku addons:attach <database-name> --credential datadog
```

> Attaching the new credential to the application will create a new environment variable in your application with the connection URL. Note that environment variable, as we use it later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attaching the new credential to the application creates a new environment variable in your application with the connection URL. Note that environment variable, as you will use it later.
```

```
CREATE SCHEMA datadog;
GRANT USAGE ON SCHEMA datadog TO datadog;
GRANT USAGE ON SCHEMA public TO datadog;
GRANT pg_monitor TO datadog;
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS pg_stat_statements;
```

Create the following function in the database:

```
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION datadog.explain_statement (
   l_query text,
   out explain JSON
)
RETURNS SETOF JSON AS
$$
BEGIN
   RETURN QUERY EXECUTE 'EXPLAIN (FORMAT JSON) ' || l_query;
END;
$$
LANGUAGE 'plpgsql'
RETURNS NULL ON NULL INPUT
SECURITY DEFINER;
```

Finally, we configure the Datadog agent to enable the Postgres check using the new credentials: 

```shell
# Ensure that you are in the root directory of your application
# Create the folder for the integrations configuration in your application code
mkdir -p datadog/conf.d/
```

Create a configuration file called `postgres.yaml` with the following contents (do not replace with your credentials, as this is done as part of the prerun script):

```yaml
init_config:

instances:
  - dbm: true
    host: <YOUR HOSTNAME>
    port: <YOUR PORT>
    username: <YOUR USERNAME>
    password: <YOUR PASSWORD>
    dbname: <YOUR DBNAME>
    ssl: True
```

> Using the environment variable that was created when the `datadog` credential was attached to the application (in the example below we assume this is `HEROKU_POSTGRESQL_PINK_URL`, add the following to the [prerun script][5] to replace those values before starting the Datadog Agent:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the environment variable that was created when the `datadog` credential was attached to the application (in the example below, this is assumed to be `HEROKU_POSTGRESQL_PINK_URL`) add the following to the [prerun script][5] to replace those values before starting the Datadog Agent:
```
